URGR - data analyses (#152)
NINAnor/ecRxiv: indicators/NO_URGR_001-006/R/NO_URGR_001-006.qmd

  [NO_URGR_004] - Urban green in settlements defined as non-impervious areas from the settlements in Local Administrative Units with Grunnkart  \
  [NO_URGR_005] - Urban green in settlements defined as non-impervious areas from the settlements in Corine Land Cover \
  [NO_URGR_006] - Urban green in settlements defined as non-impervious areas from the settlements in Grunnkart
format: 
  html:
    embed-resources: true
    code-fold: true
    toc: true
    toc-title: Contents
    toc-depth: 3
    smooth-scroll: true
execute:
  cache: true
author:
  - name: Sylvie Clappe              # Enter name
    email: sylvie.clappe@nina.no  # Enter email
    affiliations:
      - id: myID
        name: Norwegian Institute for Nature Research # Enter affiliations
  - name: Bálint Czúcz              
    email: balint.czucz@nina.no
    affiliations:
      - ref: myID               # To reuse affiliations referecen the id like this
date: April 22, 2025 # Enter date 
callout-icon: false
lightbox: true
css: ../../../style.css
code-links:
      - text: Add a review
        icon: github
        href: https://github.com/NINAnor/ecRxiv

>         bibliography: references.bib

Reviewer: @sclappe I don't think this has been addressed yet. This space is the reason why the references are not formatting properly.

>         bibliography: references.bib

Author: Oooopsi! Sorry, I forgot to fix that....

auth <- meta |>
  filter(Variable == "authors") |>
  pull(Value)
year <- meta |>
  filter(Variable == "yearAdded") |>
  pull(Value)
id <- meta |>
  filter(Variable == "indicatorID") |>
  pull(Value)
name <- meta |>
  filter(Variable == "indicatorName") |>
  pull(Value)
url <- meta |>
  filter(Variable == "url") |>
  pull(Value)

meta <- meta |>
  mutate(Variable = case_match(Variable,
    "indicatorID" ~ "Indicator ID" ,
    "indicatorName" ~ "Indicator Name",
    "country" ~ "Country",
    "continent" ~ "Continent",
    "ECT" ~ "Ecosystem Condition Typology Class",
    "yearAdded" ~ "Year added",
    "yearLastUpdate" ~ "Last update",
    .default = Variable
   )
  ) |>
  filter(Variable != "authors")

```

<!--# The following parts are autogenerated. Do not edit. -->

```{r}
#| echo: false
#| results: asis
status(st)
```

::: {layout-ncol="2"}

> **Recommended citation**: `r paste(auth, " ", year, ". ", name, " (ID: ", id, ") ", "v. ", version, ". ecRxiv: https://view.nina.no/ecRxiv/", sep="")`

> **Version**: `r version`

:::

```{=html}
<details>
<summary>Show metadata</summary>
```

```{r tbl-meta}
#| tbl-cap: 'Indicator metadata'
#| echo: false
#| warning: false

> meta |>

Author: Aggregation pathway fixed

| **Global Human Settlement Layer - SMOD**     | European Commission - Joint Research Center | Used to delineate urban domains within Local Administrative Units |  Raw data are available here: https://human-settlement.emergency.copernicus.eu/download.php?ds=smod. SMOD data filtered for Norway are available on NINA's internal repository: /data/P-Prosjekter2/412413_2023_no_egd/git_data/SMOD_2018 |

**3. URGR_003** \
<u>Definition</u> \
This indicator is a variation from the definitions of urban and urban green areas from @cond-gn-eurostat. They can be summarised as follows:

Urban areas are defined as the settlements of the Local Administrative Units (LAUs) categorised as "Cities" and their adjacent LAUs classified as "Towns and suburbs". Eurostat defines these LAUs based on the variable "DEGURBA" standing for degree of urbanisation. "Cities" correspond to `DEGURBA = 1`, while "Towns and suburbs" correspond to `DEGURBA = 2`. The settlements correspond to the ecosystem type 1. Settlements and other artificial areas as defined in the EU Ecosystem Typology.

Urban green areas are defined as for URGR_001.

<u>Datasets used</u> \

> The datasets used for URGR_003 were the same than for URGR_001. THis time, not ethat the Grunnkart was used both to extract the urban green areas, but also the urban areas themselves.

Author: This section has been entirely re-written

| **Administrative boundaries - Fylke**      | NA |  
| **Administrative boundaries - Regions and Fylke identifiers**      | NA |
| **Administrative boundaries - DEGURBA**      | NA |
<!--# What are the original units for the most relevant  variables in the data-->

### 2.3 Additional comments about the dataset
|| Origin | Year | Format |
|---------|-----|------|------|
| **Grunnkart**     | NIBIO   |    NA (released year: 2025) | vector |
| **Corine Land Cover**    | Copernicus  |   2018 |  raster | 
| **Copernicus Imperviousness**     | Copernicus    |     2018 |  raster | 
| **Global Human Settlement Layer - SMOD**     | European Commission - Joint Research Center |     2020 |raster|
| **Administrative boundaries - Local Administrative Units**      | European Commission    |  2023   |  vector |
| **Administrative boundaries - Fylke**      | Kartvetkert    |    2024 |  vector |  
| **Administrative boundaries - Regions and Fylke identifiers**      | Kartverkert    |     2024 |   excel file |
| **Administrative boundaries - DEGURBA**      | European Commission     |     2024 |    excel file |
<!--# Text here -->

#### 2.3.1 Instructions for citing, using and accessing data

> 

Author: Done

|| Publicly accessible | Link |
|---------|-----|------|

> | **Grunnkart**     | No, upon request | https://kartkatalog.geonorge.no/metadata/nasjonalt-grunnkart-for-arealanalyse-testversjon-2/28c28e3a-d88f-4a34-8c60-5efe6d56a44d |

Author: Actually, I think there is a difference between public and private institutions for accessing the GK. For municipalities it's free but for NINA it's upon request. So I leave it as upon request. It doesn't really impact much anyway.

<!--# Describe the main uncertainties or sources of error in the indicator or the underlying data. -->

## 6. References

> 

Author: Fixed

United Nations, (2024). System of Environmental Economic Accounting - Ecosystem Accounting.

Walther Franziska, Barton David N., Schwaab Jonas, Kato-Huerta Jarumi, Immerzeel Bart, Adamescu Mihai, Andersen Erling, Arámbula Coyote Martha Verónica, Arany Ildikó, Balzan Mario, Bruggeman Adriana, Carvalho-Santos Claudia, Cazacu Constantin, Geneletti Davide, Giuca Relu, Inácio Miguel, Lagabrielle Erwann, Lange Sabine, Clec’h Solen Le, Vanessa Lim Zhi Yi, Mörtberg Ulla, Nedkov Stoyan, Portela Ana Paula, Porucznik Anna, Racoviceanu Tudor, Rendón Paula, Ribeiro Daniela, Seguin Joana, Hribar Mateja Šmid, Stoycheva Vanya, Vejre Henrik, Zoumides Christos, Grêt-Regamey Adrienne, (2025). Uncertainties in ecosystem services assessments and their implications for decision support – A semi-systematic literature review. Ecosystem Services 73, 101714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2025.101714

<!--# You can add references manually or use a citation manager and add intext citations as with crossreferencing and hyperlinks. See https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/footnotes-and-citations.html -->

## 7. Datasets

> All the datasets used to compile the different versions of the URGR indicators have been thoroughly describe din the previous sections, link sto them are also provided for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the datasets used to compile the different versions of the URGR indicators have been thoroughly described in the previous sections, links to them are also provided for more information.
```

  filter(!st_is_empty(.)) %>%
  st_make_valid()

names(et_clean_list) <- names(et_list)

#  Check cleaning geometry worked
for(i in 1:length(et_clean_list)){
  geometry_check <- which(st_is_valid(et_clean_list[[i]]) == FALSE)
  print(length(geometry_check))
}

# Check for empty geometry
for(i in 1:length(et_clean_list)){
  empty_test <- which(st_is_empty(et_clean_list[[i]]) == TRUE)
  print(empty_test)
}

```

Now we just need to only extract polygons from the ecosystem type data. Some points and line are present. As we are interested in areas, we decide to remove them as they won't contribute to the area estimates. This is also to have a process that will be more comparable to the process used for URGR_30 and URGR_31 for which only polygons are used due to restrictions in the functionalities of the `exact_extract()` function.
```{r}
#| eval: false
#| code-summary: "Final dataset of ecosystem type"

# Keep only polygon features
et_final <- et_clean_list %>%
              map(\(.) st_collection_extract(.,
                                             type = c("POLYGON"), 
                                             warn = FALSE))

names(et_final) <- names(et_clean_list)
```

> The resulting data are quite heavy, it is important to clean the R Environment to free memory space.

Author: Agreed, done

                                    total_cty_grp_area_m2 = sum(total_soaa_area_m2))
```

These table have been exported to the internal repository and will be used in the Results section to create an overall summary table comparing all URGR indicators.

<!--# 

Use this header for documenting the analyses. Put code in separate code chunks, and annotate the code in between using normal text (i.e. between the chunks, and try to avoid too many hashed out comments inside the code chunks). Add subheaders as needed. 

Code folding is activated, meaning the code will be hidden by default in the html (one can click to expand it).

Caching is also activated (from the top YAML), meaning that rendering to html will be quicker the second time you do it. This will create a folder inside you project folder (called INDICATORID_cache). Sometimes caching created problems because some operations are not rerun when they should be rerun. Try deleting the cash folder and try again.

-->

## 10. Results

### National results
```{r}
#| eval: true
#| code-summary: "Code to create a comparative URGR table"

# Load the results files

> path_res <- "/data/P-Prosjekter2/412413_2023_no_egd/Results/URGR/"

Reviewer: were these produced with the code above? If yes, why do they need to be imported again? Or are these tables produce otherwise?

> path_res <- "/data/P-Prosjekter2/412413_2023_no_egd/Results/URGR/"

Reviewer 2: I don't have access to this folder. Gat you request it please, from IT? @sclappe

urgr001 <- read_excel(paste0(path_res, "URGR_001_detailed_results_24MAY25.xlsx"))
urgr002 <- read_excel(paste0(path_res, "URGR_002_detailed_results_24MAY25.xlsx"))
urgr003 <- read.table(paste0(path_res, "URGR_003_detailed_results_27MAY2025.csv"))
urgr004 <- read.table(paste0(path_res, "URGR_004_detailed_results_26MAY2025.csv"))
urgr005 <- read.table(paste0(path_res, "URGR_005_detailed_results_26JUNE2025.csv"))
urgr006 <- read_excel(paste0(path_res, "URGR_006_fylke_results_18JUNE_25.xlsx"))

# Calculate URGR indicators

> urgr001_national <- round2(sum(urgr001$total_area_et_m2) / sum(unique(urgr001$lau_area_m2)) *100, 2)

Reviewer 2: The aggregation pathway is not clear to me. It seems like you have spatially aggregated the total urban area for Norway, and then you divide it by the total urban green area for Norway. Correct? You sum it in steps, but still that's where you end up. It might be fine, but then how would you calculate the uncertainty? Maybe the % urban green can be calulated for each city/polygon? Then we would get a distribution of variable values instead of just one.

urgr005_national <- round2(sum(urgr005$total_non_imper_area_m2) / sum(urgr005$total_soaa_area_m2) *100, 2)

urgr006_national <- round2(sum(urgr006$total_non_imper_area_m2) / sum(urgr006$total_soaa_area_m2) *100, 2)

# Create the table of outputs
urgr_vec_national <- c(urgr001_national,
                       urgr002_national,
                       urgr003_national,
                       urgr004_national,
                       urgr005_national,
                       urgr006_national)

names_vec_national <- c("URGR 001",
                        "URGR 001",
                        "URGR 003",
                        "URGR 004",
                        "URGR 005",
                        "URGR 006")

res_national <- data.frame(rep("Share of urban green areas", 6),
                           names_vec_national, 
                           rep("Norway", 6), 
                           rep(2018, 6),
                           urgr_vec_national)

colnames(res_national) <- c("Indicator",
                            "ID",
                            "Accounting area",
                            "Accounting period",
                            "Variable value (%)")

> kbl(res_national)

Reviewer 2: What options do we have for showing uncertainties? The spatial variation is the most common and I think the best option. The urban areas are distinct geospatial areas. I suggest bootstrapping each urban areas weighted by the total area (km2), then getting the 25th and 75th percentile from that distribution

                    mutate(indicator = rep("URGR 005", nrow(.)),
                           urgr_regional = round2(urban_green_area_m2 / total_urban_area_m2 * 100, 2)) %>%
                    select(region_name, indicator, urgr_regional)  

urgr006_regional <- urgr006 %>%
                    left_join(., regions, join_by(fylkesnumm == fylke_nr)) %>%
                    group_by(region_name) %>%
                    summarise(urban_green_area_m2 = sum(total_non_imper_area_m2),
                              total_urban_area_m2 = sum(total_soaa_area_m2)) %>%
                    mutate(indicator = rep("URGR 006", nrow(.)),
                           urgr_regional = round2(urban_green_area_m2 / total_urban_area_m2 * 100, 2)) %>%
                    select(region_name, indicator, urgr_regional) 

# Create the table of outputs
urgr_df_regional <- bind_rows(urgr001_regional,
                              urgr002_regional,
                              urgr003_regional,
                              urgr004_regional,
                              urgr005_regional,
                              urgr006_regional)
                    

> 

Reviewer: I was wondering how the regional table should be sorted. Is the interest in comparing the regions per indicator (e.g. indicator 1 -6 for vestlanded) or one indicator for all regions (indicator 1). Depending on what is the interest one might want to sort the table differently.

Reviewer 2: I suggest using DT::datatable() instead of kbl(). That way one can sort manually in the interactive html table
